NEW U.K. TESTING REQUIREMENT: As of Tuesday, anyone aged 12 or above wishing to travel to the U.K. will need to show a negative test (lateral flow or PCR) no more than 48 hours before departure, marking a U-turn for the government under pressure to do more to slow the importation of Omicron.

Book early to avoid disappointment: The U.K. government also added Nigeria to its red list. British and Irish citizens, or those with residence rights, arriving in England are required to book a 10-day stay in a quarantine hotel ahead of time. Don’t even try boarding your flight if you haven’t done this.

FRANCE REOPENS BORDER, ADDS TESTS: France announced last weekend that all travelers arriving from non-European countries, vaccinated or not, will also have to provide a negative test on departure (antigen test within 24 hours or PCR test within 48 hours of travel).

Unvaxxed tests: In addition, all unvaccinated travelers from Europe must now demonstrate a negative test of less than 24 hours (antigen or PCR) on departure to enter France, according to the Prime Minister’s office. There’s a chance this could be extended to vaccinated people, if EU countries agree to a standardized approach.

IRELAND TIGHTENS TESTING: Ireland has announced similar measures: All visitors must show a negative test prior to departure. Both lateral flow and PCR tests can be used for vaccinated or recovered people, while unvaccinated people must get a negative PCR test, the health ministry said a week ago.

SWITZERLAND LIFTS QUARANTINE: The Alpine republic has lifted its requirement for visitors from high-risk countries to go into quarantine. At the same time, it has tightened testing for visitors including those who are vaccinated or have recovered from COVID-19. In addition to taking a PCR or rapid antigen test before traveling, a second test is now required between the fourth and seventh day after arrival. Additional social distancing measures, including requiring COVID certificates and mask wearing in a wider range of settings, are aimed at saving the winter ski season.

PORTUGUESE DISPROPORTION? The European Commission is looking into Portugal’s requirement for all passengers flying into Portugal to show a negative test before boarding, with airlines facing a fine of €20,000 per passenger for failing to check. “It remains crucial to ensure the proportionality of any measures taken and we will continue to monitor the situation closely,” a Commission spokesman said.